We have arrived at medication code.
You should now be able to understand and apply
the breakdown of diagnosis and procedure codes.
The Drug Listing Act of 1972 requires
the current listing of all drugs manufactured and distributed in the US.
This led to the creation of a drug directory called the National Drug Code Directory.
This directory has been maintained by the US FDA.
Let's go to the NDC code structure.
NDC code structure has 10-11 digit codes with multiple configurations.
The reason that there's sometimes 11 codes is that there's
often a zero padding at the end and this is used for billing purposes.
There are three parts to NDC code,
and we will walk through them in more detail with an example soon.
However, let's go through the parts at a higher level.
First, the labeler which is the drug manufacturer.
Next, the product code or the actual drug and formulation created.
Lastly, the package code which gives the form and size of the medication.
So let's take an example of NDC code that a drug
that my company release that is marketed as Tecentriq.
According to the drug use information for Tecentriq,
this medication is used to treat certain types of bladder,
urinary tract or lung cancer.
It works by helping your immune system fight the cancer.
This drug belongs to a class of drugs known as monoclonal antibodies.
One of the codes for this drug is 50242-917-01. What a mouthful?
There can be multiple codes for the same drug that is even made by the same manufacturer.
This is often due to packaging differences,
but other reasons can apply as well.
For now, we will focus on this code and then go
over later how this can manifest into other issues.
So for this code,
let's break it into three parts we just covered.
First, the label for code is the first five codes,
in a number 50242 is for genetic.
If you go to the website ndclist.com,
you can type in this number and get the list of many of the drugs that genetic produces.
Next, we'll take the three digits 917
and this refers to the product code in the actual drug formulation.
In this case, the drug has 1200mg/20mL.
As you can guess, the naming is changed for marketing.
While Tecentriq is still a bit difficult to say,
it's easier than the non-proprietary name.
Also for this, you can see the dosage form is
injection and the route of administration is intravenous.
Lastly, we'll go through the final two digits which are 01.
This refers to the packaging code.
The packages in a single vial in one carton.
How this code is often represented in billing is in 11 digit version.
You can see that a zero is added between the labeler part and the package code.
So a common term you'll hear for medical code sets is a crosswalk.
This refers to connection between two different code sets
or can even be within different versions of the same code set.
For NDC codes, we can connect them to HCPCS codes.
Depending on the data source you're looking at,
there may be a mapping from these codes.
For the previous example,
there is a cross walk between the Tecentriq NDC code and HCPCS code J9022.
Something to note is that the HCPCS code stands for J,
and the J codes tend to be drugs that are injected and not taken orally.
You can see that the HCPCS code maps in some info as well from the NDC code.
So one of the major challenges with NDC codes is
to normalize or group codes by common types of drugs.
For example, let's take acetaminophen.
You would think that this would be relatively straightforward to
group whenever someone has NDC code for this drug.
However, as you can see from this table of only a sample of the results from
NDC lists that there may be many drugs that
could contain acetaminophen of other drugs too.
To address this problem just mentioned,
the NIH developed a normalized naming system called RxNorm,
which does what its name implies and groups medications together.
This is important because providers,
pharmacies pairs all send EHR records with this data,
but might use different names and
becomes difficult to communicate between different systems.
To illustrate this issue,
take a look at the drug of naproxen and
just a few examples of different names of naproxen,
that is the same thing.
While there is a crosswalk between NDC codes and RxNorm,
there are still some issues and depending on the system you are dealing with,
they could use one or the other code set.
That was a lot of information to digest.
I'm sure you'll be able to pick this up quickly as you go through more
of the exercises and hear this terminology more.